---
layout: post
title: "Call for Community Council Nominations"
author: "Juliana Sims"
---

Hello,

The F-Droid Board's first effort to start an F-Droid Community Council -- an
important step toward ensuring a safe, constructive, and empowered community --
was not successful despite an excellent initial group of members and a strong
desire all around to see the effort succeed.  After reflection and discussion,
we have learned some lessons from this experience, including about how to set up
newly elected Council members for success.  With that in mind, we are ready to
open a new call for nominations for the Community Council.

The Community Council will primarily be responsible for enforcing the [Code of
Conduct](https://f-droid.org/docs/Code_of_Conduct/) (CoC).  As part of that
responsibility, the Council will be charged with drafting new language for the
Code of Conduct and establishing content guidelines for applications published
by F-Droid.  This first Council will also help to build out protocols and
establish precedent for how the Community Council relates to the project, the
community, and the Board.

In order to execute its responsibilities, the CC will be given requisite
permissions to moderate in all official F-Droid channels.  Of particular note,
CC members will receive developer privileges on F-Droid Gitlab repositories to
be used only for moderation purposes because Gitlab lacks a specific moderator
role.

In addition to enforcing the Code of Conduct and helping establish the Community
Council as an institution, prospective Council members should also be willing
and able to mediate conflicts and disagreements before they rise to the level of
Code of Conduct violations.  As such, they should be trusted, established
members of the community with at least "Reporter" status on Gitlab.  They should
also be willing to listen to multiple parties in disagreements and seek the most
equitable solution for the given circumstances.

If these traits and roles fit you or someone you know, first ensure your nominee
is willing and able to fill the position, then email `elections {at} f-droid
{dot} org` with your nomination.  The nomination should describe the nominee and
their relationship to F-Droid, why they consider the Council important, and a
summary of past experience or skills relevant to this position.  Nominations
will close on December 15th, 2024.

Once nominations are closed, the Board will announce nominees and accept
community feedback until January 1st, 2025.  The Council members will then be
appointed at the next Board meeting, subject to Board review.

We hope to hear from you soon!

Thanks,
Juliana Sims,
on behalf of the F-Droid Board of Directors
